All right, now, in the last lesson, we continued learning more about do while loops or loops in general,
and we modified our program to limit the number of guesses that we could make when guessing our random
number.
I think we limited it to like four guesses, and we stopped the loop from occurring in a couple of ways.
First, we stopped the loop by just having a nested conditional down in here where we checked how many
wrong guesses we'd had.
And then if we exceeded that number, we just exited out of the main method, which in turn exited out
of the entire program.
Then we modified it to add that check to the while clause here by adding this bit right here.
And so we did that just to see a couple of different ways.
Now we're going to see another way that we could potentially do this, though.
So probably, I would say the most common or maybe the most popular type of loop is the for loop.
And so what a for loop does is it loops over a block of code just as the while and do while loops do.
However, by default, the for loop will only loop a certain number of times.
So that's kind of built in to the loop itself, like you can actually explicitly tell it.
I want you to loop two times or 20 times or whatever.
So let's see if we could use a for loop to re-implement this program and prevent us from guessing more
than four times.
All right.
So first, let me close this area here to make a little room, and let's get a good look at the main
body of our loop, which is this area right here, right?
All of this is the main body of our loop.
So I think what we want to do in general is to replace our do while loop with the for loop instead.
And there are a few ways that we could try to retrofit this program to do this.
But what I'm kind of thinking of doing is to comment about the do part of the loop here on Line 13 and
the whale part.
First off, and that leaves us with just the body.
And then I'm thinking to surround this with a for loop by doing a command option T and then choosing
number five here for surround with four like so.
And now the ID is waiting for us to tell it what to go inside of here.
So if you remember the syntax for the while loop, which we sort of have right here while and then you
get parentheses and then you give it some criteria.
So here in the for loop, it's asking us for something kind of like the criteria, although the criteria
here are a little bit different.
So like I said earlier, the for loop loops a certain number of times.
And so we need to tell the for loop basically how many times we want it to loop.
Now the way we do this, we don't we don't just put a number in here like that.
That would be kind of interesting, though, if we could do that instead, we need to use a local variable
for the for loop that will hold on to the count.
And then it will increment that count as well.
And so here's how we can do this.
Now we already have a variable right here, the wrong guess count, right?
So I'm kind of thinking, maybe we can just reuse this variable here.
OK, now the typical way that you will see the counting variable used in a for loop is to actually declare
and initialize that variable within the loop itself.
So let's see what that would look like.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to grab this variable here because this is already accomplishing
that basic job.
So I will grab this line here and I'm going to actually cut it with a Command X or a Control X, and
then I'm going to paste it right there.
All right.
Now, the next thing we need to do in the for loop is to tell it when it should stop.
And the way we do that is actually with a criteria, something along the lines of these criteria that
we have down here, but it will be based on the wrong guest count.
So basically, we're saying, OK, start off with wrong guest count equal to whatever in this case one.
And then we're going to say basically while or as long as the.
On gas count, while the wrong gas count is less than or equal to, and then I think we're going to
use our max allowed tried constant there.
So Max allowed tried.
So while the wrong gas count is less than or equal to the max allowed tried, then the last thing we
have to do.
So there's kind of three parts to this.
The last part that we have to put inside of this for loop is to just tell it to increment the wrong
gas count by some amount and typically you would incremented by one.
So we will simply reference the wrong gas count plus plus.
All right.
So what this for loop is saying is start off with the wrong gas count variable equal to one.
Then as long as the wrong gas count is less than or equal to the max allowed tried loop through this
body and increment this variable by one.
That's what this four loop is saying.
So this is the standard syntax for a for loop.
You declare an initialized the variable in the first bit, followed by semicolon.
Then you define your looping criteria, like the criteria that determine whether or not it should keep
looping would go here.
So loop as long as the wrong gas count is less than or equal to the max allowed tried.
And then you will tell it how you want to increment.
And the reason you have to state this here is because you could decide to increment by two or three
or whatever it doesn't matter.
And then the rest of the body of the loop goes inside of the four loop, just like any other loop.
OK.
All right.
Now I'm going to delete some of this, some of these comments because I want to clean up the code a
little bit and I'm going to get rid of this unused do here.
Now I see an error already right down here.
The ID is telling us that it cannot resolve the symbol wrong guest count, meaning it doesn't see that
this variable is declared.
The reason for that is because we are using the typical approach to setting up a for loop where we would
declare the counter variable inside of the four loop itself.
But by doing so, this variable now only has scope within the loop.
And here we are using this variable outside of the loop, so we need to consider how do we want to do
this?
Now the reason we even put this here was so that we would know when we should show this message once
the loop is done right.
So if we want to leave this this way, then we cannot declare this variable here.
We can set its value here, but we can't declare it here.
And the declaration is simply the fact that we are saying, Hey, Java, give me a variable of type
entry that is called this OK, that's the declaration.
So we're going to need to have at least the declaration occur outside of the for loop if we want to
keep referring to this variable here outside of the four loop, OK?
So this gets back to the concept of scope again.
OK, now we could just do this and then we need to remove this integer because keeping this variable
data type here is the declaration.
So now what's happening is we're declaring it twice and we can't do that.
So two to only declare at one time which would be up here, we need to remove the data type here just
like that.
So now we're declaring the variable here and then we are setting it here.
Now, technically what's happening, though, is this declaration here is actually equivalent to doing
this.
If you don't explicitly set the value of an integer when you declare it, its value will be zero anyway.
That is the default value of an integer.
And I think most numerical types, for that matter.
So this is kind of implied.
In fact, if I hover over the zero, you can even see there's a message variable wrong guess count initialize
or zero is redundant.
It's telling me that because it's just saying you don't need to tell us that you want to set it to zero,
that's going to be the default anyway.
Now, if you want to set it to something else, though, then you do have to do that.
Now I could also set it here, and I could even get rid of this first of three clauses, if you will,
for the for loop like so.
Right?
So I just emptied that out.
So this is all equivalent.
Now you won't see this, this syntax super.
Are super often with the for loop.
It's a little less common to see, but it's equivalent because I'm declaring and initializing the very
the loop variable here.
And then I don't have to mention it as the first clause of the for loop, right?
It's all kind of the same thing.
All right.
But I can only do this.
I can only leave that out because I decided to maintain the state of my loop variable outside of the
four loop itself.
OK.
That's the only reason I'm allowed to leave it out here, and I will let you know that I pretty much
never use this particular syntax for for for a loop.
Not because I think there's anything wrong with it, but just, I don't know, is just out of habit
or whatever.
This isn't the typical way that I would do this.
Typically, most of the times when I am using a for loop, I'm OK to actually declare and initialize
it within the four loop itself.
Usually, I don't need access to that variable from outside of the loop itself just so happens in this
particular case, I do for now out of laziness.
I'm going to leave this as it is.
Let's see.
OK.
So let's go ahead and just try this out and see what happens.
I could go through some static analysis and try to think through it, but I don't know that there's
much point to that.
Let's have some fun and just run this and see if it breaks, see if it behaves correctly.
All right, so let's build.
All right.
And then we'll open back up the terminal.
Let's clear and then let's run it.
All right, so let's see, random number is eight, and just a quick reminder, we're only showing this
random number, the actual number that is randomly being picked for debugging purposes so that we can
control when we want to win or not and how many times we loop.
OK, so let's first try out the case where we guess wrong every time.
Right?
And make sure that the loop ends.
So let's not guess.
Eight.
Let's do one.
You didn't get it.
OK.
Two.
Whoo!
OK, let's see here.
You didn't get it.
You've had four incorrect guesses.
The random number is eight interesting, so we only guessed twice, but at that we guessed four times
then I think I know why that is.
Do you want to take a quick stab at figuring out why we only got two guests two times what the program
thinks?
We had four incorrect guesses.
Take a moment.
Pause the video.
See if you can figure that out and then join back.
OK?
I'm pretty sure the reason for that is because the For Loop is now responsible for incrementing the
wrong guest count here, but I forgot to remove this incrementing right here on Line 23, so we don't
want both of these now.
So I'm going to just delete that line with a command, delete or control way on Windows, Linux and
let's rebuild and try it again and see if that is all we needed to do there.
All right.
And I'm going to clear and rerun.
Random number is nine, so let's try that again.
We'll we'll guess all wrong numbers here.
One.
Nope.
Two.
Three.
Nope.
Four.
OK, let's see here.
You didn't get it.
You've had four incorrect guesses.
The random number is nine ending program.
Now that looks.
That looks right, right?
That looked good.
So, yeah, the four loop looks like it did its job.
It was told to only allow us to loop four times.
And afterwards, the thread automatically exited out of the loop.
And then because we had a count greater than or equal to four, I think we set that to, yeah, greater
than or equal to four.
It printed out that little message saying, Hey, you've had all these tries and you're terrible.
So I think that worked the way we wanted it to.
Let's let's check that the other functionality still works as well.
We will regression test.
All right.
So we'll rerun this now.
And this time, let's get the correct number right off the bat.
Three.
The random number was three.
You got it in one try and we exited out because of this return here.
All right.
So that worked.
And then let's try the intermediate scenario where we get a couple of guesses wrong, but then we get
it before we get to four wrong guesses.
So we'll run this again.
And let's guess wrong one time, two times.
And now let's get it correct on the last time the random number was four.
You got it in three tries looking good.
All right.
So now there's another thing that I want to show you with loops so far when we want to end the loop
prematurely, such as when you guessed correctly like we have here right in this bit here.
This is what happens when you guessed correctly.
If that happens, then we are using the return keyword and that is actually telling the thread to return
from whatever method it's presently in.
And that method would be, in this case, the main method, which is the only method in the program.
So to return from the main method is to actually just stop the program right, because as soon as you
exit out of the main method, you have exited out of the entire program.
In this particular case, now there could be other cases where you're in a program that has multiple
methods and you're just returning out of one of many methods and you're not necessarily killing the
whole program.
But in this particular case, since the main method is the main entry point into the program, when
we exit out of the main method, we have exited the entire program.
OK.
All right.
So we're exiting out of there by telling the thread to return from the current method that it's in.
However, we could instead just exit out of the loop itself.
Now, in this particular program, since there's not much else outside of the loop other than this bit
of code here, effectively the program will still end, but that might be a more elegant way to get
out of this bit here.
OK.
So if we want to simply exit out of a loop prematurely, so in this case, it's a for loop that is designated
to go up to four times four iterations.
If we want to exit out of this loop earlier than that, such as here without necessarily directly just
killing the program instead of using a return, there's another keyword we could use, and we've actually
seen it before we could use break.
So when you are in a loop and you use break, such as Here, Break tells the thread to break out.
Of the loop that you're in.
OK, now the other place where we saw a break was in, that was when we were using the Switch operator,
right?
And each of the cases of the Switch operator required a break to get out of it.
Otherwise, the thread would fall through to all of the other cases and execute each of them below wherever
the case was that you had matched on.
And that wasn't a very desirable outcome, but the break keyword also is used to break us out of a loop.
So let's try this out and just verify that the program still works just as well as it did before.
So what should happen now is when we guess the correct number, the thread will come here.
It will do all of this.
It will show us the random number was blah blah blah.
You got it in so many tries and then we will break out of this loop, which will put us right outside
of the loop.
So if I put my cursor at the curly brace of the four loop, which is right here on Line 13, then that
highlights the ending brace or the end of the body for the for loop, which is on line 25.
And so what'll happen is the thread will see break.
It will break right to the outside of the for loop.
It will then come here and in this particular case, because we will have gotten the gas correct.
We won't have hit the wrong guest count.
And so the thread will skip right over this block here.
And then the next thing that will happen is that the program will still just end.
OK.
So in other words, we shouldn't see any difference in the behavior as a user of this program.
All right.
So let's build command f nine or control f nine.
And I'm going to clear.
And then let's run it.
All right.
Random number is eight, so let's just jump straight to it.
Eight, The random number was eight.
You got it in one try and we have broken out of the program, by the way.
If it's not entirely clear to you, the reason I know that we've broken out of the program is because
now I'm seeing a prompt for my command line.
If you're on windows, your prompt will look a little different, but that's how I know that the program
has ended.
I guess if we wanted to, though, we could put a little system that out and just say program ended
something like that.
All right.
So looks like using the break actually works just just fine for us.
So again, that break is now breaking us out of the loop, regardless of what the criteria say.
That's a way to just kind of short circuit and say, Hey, I need to hurry up and get out of this loop
right now.
I don't want it to iterate any more times so you can just use a break to break out of it.
And so, by the way, the break statement works with all loops, not just the for loop.
OK, so we can use that with the for loop, with the while loop with the do, while loop any loop that
we're learning so far.
Break will work and you can always use that to break out of that loop.
Now there's another special keyword that we can use in loops, which is sort of related to the break,
but a little bit different.
And that is continue, and I'm going to put that down here.
Continue.
Now what continue does, is it short circuits, any remaining code that might get executed within a
loop and causes the thread to just go back to the top of the loop and iterate again?
All right.
So why would we ever want to have this continue here?
While one typical place where you might use a continue within a loop might be inside of another conditional?
Now I don't have a great reason to do this here, so I'm just going to talk to this and maybe show you
some examples, but we won't use this as as real.
OK, so let's say we had another conditional something like if some criteria and right now, I'm just
going to hard code that to true and I'll come back in and we'll talk a little bit more about this.
But if some criteria, then do this and continue.
But then outside of this, if block, we might say alternatively.
You really, really didn't get it.
You're quite terrible at guessing.
Now let's pretend like we had some criteria in here like, actually, you know what?
Here we'll put something stupid in here.
Local date dot now not.
Get day of week, get day of week.
Equals Monday.
All right.
Now this is just kind of nonsensical.
OK, so what I'm saying here is, if you guessed wrong.
And the day of the week is Monday.
I'm going to go easy on you and just say you didn't get it, but if it's not Monday, you're not going
to get this nice message here.
You're going to get this message saying, no, you're really terrible at guessing, right?
And I could have have that happen multiple times or have a bunch of stuff here, right?
So what's happening here is this continue is letting me short circuit the loop.
I don't want to stop the loop.
I just want to print this slightly nicer negative message and then get back over to the loop again and
then and then go to the next iteration of the Loop.
OK.
But if it's not Monday any day other than Monday in this, you know, just random criteria that I've
put here, if it's not Monday, you're going to get a harsher message.
And then the loop will continue.
Now, of course, I could have also just done this without a continue.
I could have removed that and put an else here like so I could have done that also.
That's functionally equivalent.
I'm just looking for a good reason to show you.
You know, one way that you might have used the continue without having to think of like a really great
scenario here.
Hopefully, you understand, though, OK, so this this continue here is short circuiting all of this
without killing the loop, right?
It's ending this particular iteration of the loop, but it's not exiting us out of the loop.
The way that break would do break actually breaks us out of the loop.
We're never going to iterate through that loop again in this program, at least.
OK.
Whereas Continue is going to just jump back up to the top of the loop and then run through it again.
All right.
Does that make sense?
So let me clean this up.
Now we will revisit the for loop more in the future, especially when we learn about collections which
are kind of like lists of things because for loops are extremely commonly used when you need to do what's
called iterating over things.
Those could be objects or primitives or something like that.
Any time you have a list of things like if you recall in one of the previous programs, when we wrote
code that modeled a person, if you imagine that we had created 100 people and we wanted to iterate
over each of those 100 people and print their full names on the screen.
Right?
So if we were holding on to those 100 people in something called a collection, we could then iterate
over that collection and print their names so we will learn how to do that.
And the most common way to do that in most programming languages traditionally has been using a for
loop for loops exist in probably just about every programming language there is.
They've been around a long, long time and in many, many languages, the syntax is pretty much exactly
like this.
And in fact, in at least see the languages of C C++ think Perl, though it's been a long time since
I coded in Perl, probably c sharp swift.
The for loop looks either exactly like this or extremely similar, so it's a very common type of loop
for that matter, while loops are as well.
But but the for loop is probably the most common type of loop there is.
All right, so I'm going to wrap up this lesson and I will see you in the next one.